Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thank you. Here we are again. Great fortune. Lovely opportunity
to be together. Thanks so much for joining in. And thank you all for joining in. I thank
myself for joining in. It's really good. This is good. We've come here to celebrate the dharma,
to activate the dharma in our own minds and hearts right now. So we put this time aside
to kind of let that preciousness sizzle and open up and kind of inform all of our experience,
this kind of lived present moment. So as we always do, we kind of really reactivate that.
This connection to dharma and the connection to our own goodness, the goodness of others,
in these three ways we reactivate that. With renunciation, or joy and appreciation. And
then secondly, with bodhicitta. And thirdly, with pure perception. And so the first, we
kind of really turn on our gratitude and just kind of relax in one way. Just we are wonderful.
We have this goodness to just kind of be with that. Let that goodness just kind of be there
and just relax and settle. Take a deep breath and just kind of get to enjoy the being in
the presence of your goodness. Let it just kind of come on, turn on, and like really
kind of shine out and appreciate all these amazing, fortunate circumstances we have.
So kind of activate this joy and appreciation and connect to that goodness inside. And then
secondly, with bodhicitta, we're connecting to the goodness and others too. That they're
so precious that all these beings have been our parents. We're like our only children.
So many times in so many varieties of situations. And even if we don't believe that, that these
beings, they don't want to suffer and they want to be happy. All of them, every single
being we come across, all the days and years go by. Every single person or being or animal
we've ever come across, that's all they want is to be happy. Just like me. Just like each
of us. And so we're doing this practice so that this can be a genuine benefit for others.
That we can wake up and connect to our inherent goodness and have that shine out and just
encourage and uplift and support and nourish all beings we come in contact with until they're
totally free, until their goodness shines on forever. So this bodhicitta, they turn
this on. And then the pure perception or our Vajra nature, Vajra pride, kind of seeing
that goodness in ourselves and in others and in one way kind of relaxing. Also our sense
doors a little bit, not so tight, not so boxed in and kind of really to let it kind of let
that awareness, that kindness, that creative kind of distilled intelligence to let it kind
of really blaze and shine out. This isn't so much as a some kind of a horror show or
some wheel of suffering we have to escape, but more like this is something to really
enjoy and savor. This experience we have right now, this moment, like the colors we're seeing,
the sounds we're hearing, that if we like pause and kind of allow it to be a recognition
of like, wow, how amazing this is. These colors and sounds, these tastes and memories, these
emotions, like just the richness of it all. So in a very kind of like we could say in
a really kind of approachable way, just that richness of life and my own direct experience
right now. I could in some way be like this pure perception. So we'll kind of turn on
these three qualities in our own experience right now.
Wonderful. Thank you. So the topic today is called Releasing Buddhist Guilt, Releasing
Buddhist Guilt. And so that's kind of more just like a, you know, a title, a way to kind
of designate what we're looking at. And this comes up in response to kind of different
questions we've gotten from Nundro in terms of specifically the idea of like, we're surrounded
with all of these amazing techniques and opportunities, these prayers, like calling the lama from
a far prayer by his Holiness, Duja Rinpoche, that's right at the beginning of this Nundro.
Sometimes it's just so amazing, these vodra songs, these descriptions of how enlightened
beings are and what they see. Sometimes it's just so extraordinary that it actually can
make us feel bad. Like, wow, another reason that I'm not really there yet. Like I read
the prayer and it doesn't really kind of turn alive in my own heart and mind. And it kind
of can do this kind of turn where it actually makes me have like a little bit of a distance
from it, as if like I'm outside of that. And so this kind of heaviness can come. And this
is just such a human thing. And I have so much sympathy for this. And so I'm just thinking
about that and contemplating it in my experience. And I surely have a lot of feelings of just,
you know, trying to activate this joy and appreciation in bodhicitta and vodra pride.
This is the path, right? I mean, if it was already easy and could just turn on, then
we'd all be there and done. There'd be no path. We would be free. But so we have a little
distance from this. I mean, each of us do. We're sentient beings. So it becomes this
really practical Dharma question of like, how can I, you know, use these tools and techniques,
these descriptions and stories, all these practices, how can I use them to relieve my
burden, to relieve my suffering and not just become another way to feel bad or to feel
guilty? And here I'm not saying guilty in like some kind of technical term. Okay. So
I'm not a therapist and this isn't therapy. I think it's really good to just say that
clearly. I don't have any professional expertise in terms of this deep emotional work. I really
have a lot of respect for all the different kinds of therapeutic modalities there are
for mind and body. It's just such an amazing to be so caring, to have taken the time to
really learn different ways that the mind and the body function to help one another,
ourselves and others to attune, to heal, to find relief, to find happiness. I have so
much honor for like really respect for that. People who do that. But this is kind of more
along the lines of specifically of like Buddha Dharma. So talking about this topic of kind
of releasing Buddhist guilt, so like this sense of heaviness we can have, even it's not so
much like technically Buddhist guilt, but it's more like it does a sentient being just
kind of feeling bad, like bummed out and like heavier by I'm not good enough. And then I'm
like I identify as a Buddhist and so then it's like I'm a Buddhist and I have all these things
I know I should do, could do these steps I could take and if I don't take them then it
can make me feel worse. So what to do about that? So that's kind of the topic for this
nundra. And I think it's just a really real human thing. I mean I think a lot of these
topics and discussions is not trying to be like some like a nice saucy kind of new catchy
title or something. Genuinely, myself and others that I've been in touch with for years,
this is a real issue. It's a real challenge. Especially in contemporary culture where there's
so much about kind of low self-esteem and the lack of self-worth, a lack of kind of
connectedness, a feeling a part of something, of having a defined purpose. These are in one
way it's like kind of another like layer of pandemic of our time. And not to diagnose this
problem really specifically or with too much time but contemporary culture it is kind of
more about what we have. It's kind of a tangible degenerate time, right? We have to demonstrate
our worth by proving something, producing something, consuming something. What we have
to show it, you know, it's very tangible and it's not so much about who we are, our being
quality, the presence we bring, our ability to bear witness, the creative energy that
we hold and engage something with, the love that we like generate just simply. Like a
simple moment of kindness is so deep and profound. But we happen to be in kind of a lot of
contemporary
cultures in general, speaking generally that these kind of more quiet features sometimes
we just call them emotions. Emotions kind of get overlooked a little and it's just what
we do and how much we have and how big our bank account is and all that. So not to diagnose
it too much but it's just to say this is a problem, it's a challenge, this is a big challenge.
So how do we have our dharma practice not become one more reason of why I suck, you
know? How do we use it to inspire ourselves? Sometimes, he talks about getting out of the
ditch. How can we get out of this specific ditch to find our inherent goodness and worth,
our value? So this is a gigantic topic but it's worth really, it's worth kind of looking
at a little bit even to just publicly talk about it that we have this experience of the
path can actually feel like too much, too hard but where could I even start? So alignment
so far away, how could I ever get there? All save, all beings, help, all beings, how is
that even possible? You know, this can become like a way that we actually prevent ourselves
from connecting to the dharma, from connecting to our own goodness. So in the end, I mean
kind of more speaking from more of the result of the path, like that's all that we're trying
to do is recognize that goodness in ourselves and others, right? They say all the Buddha's
teachings are about revealing that inherent goodness and removing what's temporarily blocking
it, that that's what a Buddha is. A Buddha is one who completely removed all the temporary
obscurations, the cognitive and emotional obscurations. They removed everything that
was temporary. There was distracting, there was destabilizing from the true nature. There
was adventitious, they're just temporary. They removed the stains and then after removing
the stains, what did that happen? They revealed that inherent goodness in themselves and in
others in all phenomena that everything is inherently good. We have this inherent goodness.
And so one way, to some degree, like dealing with a sense of this kind of heaviness or
kind of when we lock up in response to the beauty of something, the beauty of a prayer,
the beauty of an opportunity, the magnificence of a practice or of a visualization, like
sometimes we really need to use healthy habits like good conceptualization or a reframing.
And part of reframing really is even just the belief, that idea, I am good. You are
good. We have this Buddha nature. This is what's essential. And all the things covering
that up, they're temporary. They're stains. They are removable. These mistakes we've made,
the activities we do that are unhealthy or harmful, these are temporary mistakes. They
are not essential. They are not who we are. And then Buddhism is very clear about this
point. We are not inherently bad. We are inherently good. Every single being. And then Buddhism
in Mahayana magnifies that. The very fabric, the empty open dynamic fabric of all reality
is sparkling with love and compassion and wisdom. It's just woven in. It's like when
the mind recognizes emptiness, it just turns on brightly as love and compassion and power.
Skillful means. This is conceptually and experientially, this is the fabric bedrock essential
teaching
of the Buddha. We are all good. And so that's just a conceptual framing. And we can read
those teachings on Buddha nature. And we can read teachings on the 18 endowments. What
are we so fortunate to not be under the limited by? We're not hell beings. We're not pretense.
There's this list of 18 endowments. Not only what do we avoid that's bad, what do we have
that's wonderful? And we should conceptually really touch that. Really look into that.
Like in his book, a torch lighting the way to freedom, it's so beautiful, this table
of contents. He goes through each of these 18 endowments. And it's just so lovely to
even reconnect with that a little bit. Just a little. And if it's too much or if it becomes
a long list, then we need to just kind of pace ourselves. We need to know our own minds
a little bit. What helps my mind open up? If a whole list of 18 things doesn't do it and
I just need one, one simple thing, then use the one simple thing. We don't have to open
a door in 84,000 ways. We just have to open the door once. We need to connect to the medicine
or the Dharma, the specific technique or the turning of the mind, the kind of attunement,
the one that helps my mind right now open up. We only need the one. We don't need all
of them. So we have to like clearly look at our minds and see what is it that my mind
is kind of like holding an unrealistic way and then what's the way to kind of release
that holding. And I would read just because this is inspiring. Also in his Holies Deuterum
is what counsels from my heart. "Of all the 84,000 sections of the Buddha's teachings,
none is more profound than bodhicitta. Make every effort on the path uniting absolute
and relative bodhicitta. This distills the essence of all the sutras and the tantras.
The subduing of one's own mind is the root of Dharma. When the mind is controlled, defilements
naturally subside." Again, these are concepts that we hear and the path is to like directly
taste this for ourselves, to experience it, to put it into practice and to transform how
our mind is, how our heart is, which means just to connect with that goodness, to reveal
that inherent dignity that we all have, the Buddha nature. But if too much complex complications,
if it doesn't help us, then distill it into bodhicitta. And if we need that, if that's
too simple, then we can get more complex. Zoom into bodhicitta, relative bodhicitta
and absolute bodhicitta, and what's a relative bodhicitta, aspiring bodhicitta and engaging
bodhicitta. As aspirations, even if we're in a really dark place and we're stuck, we
can wish and pray, we can aspire, that one day we'll be able to like totally mingle our
minds with the Dharma. One day, may I really be a boat, a bridge, an island, the medicine,
like for all the beings wondering in samsara, the ocean of samsara, we can make that aspiration.
That's something that we can just turn our mind a little bit. It's so simple, but so
profound. It really changes everything, to kind of have a little aspiration prayer. So
if there's certain aspiration prayers, you know, then like write down a little aspiration
prayer and every now and then kind of remind yourself of that. In Lama Chime, he would
write line, Dharma lines, and then kind of paste them around his practice area to kind
of tune in. He had, they said, on his puja table in Mondarava house in Florida, he had
all these watches, impermanent. We need to use these conceptual reminders to reactivate
our experience or to reinvigorate our practice. We should use these conceptual reminders, but
they all come down to like actually tasting it for ourselves. It's one thing to hear about
the Buddha nature or that Vajra pride to hear about it. And that is really important to
turn our minds to that possibility. Because if we're not aware of a possibility, it's
really hard to consciously undergo a process to awaken that possibility or to actualize
the possibility. We do need to frame in a certain way and use concepts that are healthy
and helpful for us. But in the end, it's about actually the transformation. So what are the
steps of actually awakening that dignity, that competence, the courage in my experience?
Where then the Dharma like, wow, the kind of amazing stories and it's like everything
can be inspiring and uplifting and the challenges can be much more of like opportunity to purify
or an opportunity to help, an opportunity to surrender to the goodness, to the Dharma,
to the natural flow of cause and effect. So that's, we need to actually kind of transform.
That's what it's leading to. So they say practice, right? We use study and practice and we need
to balance these two. And Pali is pariyati and pati-pati. Pati-pati, we study. This was
so valuable to memorize text, to write out Dharma teachings of the Buddha. There's so
much merit and good positive virtuous energy that we can generate doing things like this.
And so much about the path is just to generate virtue, is to become disciplined in being
virtuous, to have a longing to be helpful, to be a valuable service, to like have that
goodness come out, to have like this longing to care for others. And then in the practical
application of that, they say like in this book, there's a new book by Patra Karmiche,
Awakening Dignity. Awakening Dignity by Patra Karmiche. This specifically is going over
this specific topic of how to awaken dignity, of how to actually, what are the steps we
do to come out of this kind of closed mindedness or like shut down experience, this tension
we have that's not natural. But how do we release it? How do we awaken it? And he has
a few lines in here that are really, so many lines were really helpful and I've only just
started looking at this, but he said, "Compassion is how we begin. Wisdom is how we grow. And
dignity is how we are." I thought that was so profound. Compassion is where we begin.
Wisdom is how we grow. Dignity is how we are. So how we begin, how we grow, and how we are.
We can begin with compassion. So if it's hard to have compassion for oneself, self-love,
self-care, I know in contemporary times, this seems like it's a lot harder to do than to
care for someone else. So if it's easier to care for someone else, there's so many opportunities
for that in really small ways. And we can start with quiet, subtle, imperceptible ways
like aspiring bodhicitta, like reciting for boundless. Take some extra time to just recite
for boundless, just slowly. You can say one and then pause. May all beings have happiness
and the cause of happiness. May all beings be free from suffering and the cause of suffering.
May all beings never be dissociated from the supreme happiness which is without suffering.
May all beings remain in boundless equanimity, free from both attachment to close ones and
rejection of others. Of all the world, like throughout the whole world, of all the words
said today, one time, at least, the for boundless was recited. It actually, reality, let that
happen. That's such a big view. All beings have happiness. I always love it when Ken
Busanwandoni Rinpoche talks about the for boundless. Because he always gets so gushy. Gushy and
he like sizzles and like kind of sparks on. Because it's the dharma. It's like the heart
of the dharma. It's the heart of bodhicitta, this aspiring bodhicitta. May all beings be
free of suffering and the causes of suffering. It's so simple to say this and just let your
mind be with that, even the sound of it. Just the idea that it happened in this space. That's
such a thought. That such an aspiration was made. It becomes a noble space. It becomes
like a sacred place. That such profound dharma was set. And you said it. I said it. And I'm
just repeating something, but it connects directly to the nature. Then in addition,
do Tonglen. Awaken that really that kind of passionate, compassionate care for all beings
to love them so viscerally. Like they're your only child, children. Then I want to help them
activate that kind of sense of like really kind of leaning in responsibility. That courageous
leaning in. I'll take on their suffering. I'll give them my happiness. Just as if it
was my own baby who was sick. Or if it was like a wounded animal in front. You know,
sometimes this little baby is so easy to love. And sometimes it's someone who's really writhing
and a lot of pain is like lashing out. It's like a wounded animal who can't help but try
to bite someone if they go to help them. We can use Tonglen. Practice like Tonglen. We
can just do it quietly. We don't have to tell anyone. We don't have to change our posture.
It's all about kind of our mind and opening and our heart opening. And what is that? Connecting
to that fundamental dignity. That goodness we have. That's all the teachings are going
towards revealing that fundamental goodness. And removing what is obscuring it or blocking
it. Shutting it down. So these doubts that we have as a human realm being. Doubt and
hesitation are the big stumbling blocks. These doubts I have about myself and about the Dharma
and about cause and effect and about all these things. Yes, there's a doubt that leads us
towards the nature. And then there's doubt that leads us away from the nature. Venerable
Kimberly Chase have been really clear about this. The doubt that leads us toward the nature
activates our compassion, activates our wisdom, activates our dignity. That inherent goodness
or that power, the skillful versatility of creative kind of mind. Healthy doubt awakens
those qualities. So we're getting closer to our natural state of being. Unhealthy doubt
blocks us from that sparkling energy of our own inherent goodness. So we can discern.
Is this doubt making me more tense, more reactive, more closed-minded, more prideful? Or is it
making me more at ease, more connected, more enlivened, more enthusiastic? So we need to
be clear about which is happening in our experience. And we need to really have this discernment.
When a technique is really like helping me connect to my goodness. And so many of the
kind of easy avenue, little easier access ones are rooted in compassion. A genuine care
for others. And we can start small. We can start with more of a meta where we love just
one person who's easy to love. Someone in our lives who we're really close with. We
can expand that to include more beings we love. We can expand that to include ourselves,
our family. And we can gradually grow these muscles or open these capacities that we have
to connect to our goodness in little by little. They'll grow. Like the great Shanti Deva said,
that's the quality of a habit. The more we do it, the easier it becomes. Then we have
to discern whether it's a good habit. And so it's helping us on the path or it's a bad
habit. And it's blocking our way on the path. And that's up to our own discernment. And
following kind of the guidance of our teachers and of course the great Buddha Shakyamuni
and Guru Rinpoche. We have so many kind of avenues of helping us line up with what actually
to make healthy decisions kind of have a more wise discernment. So there's really a lot
of things to say about this. But one thing is this that helped me too also in this book,
Awakening Dignity. I thought in my mind, Vajrasattva practice we all know. This is really the big
purification practice in Vajrayana or Tibetan Buddhist worldview. To connect with Buddha
Vajrasattva. And how do we connect with Buddha Vajrasattva with the four powers? The four
powers. And what was helpful in this book is Patra Girmaje, he called them the four healing
powers. And it really changed something in my mind. The four healing powers. Okay. Hmm.
This is so curious because in a, so this is like to take a little bit of a sidestep, but
the sutra approach in general in terms of the Buddha's teachings, it kind of posits
something's broken and we have to fix it. Something's wrong. Like there's a burning
house or I got shot with an arrow or like there's this ocean of suffering or a pit of
vipers or my hair's on fire. Like there's a problem and I need to remedy the problem.
So in that way of holding these kind of situations of life in the kind of, in the sutra mode,
which is if I'm in that mode, then I need a sutra response to that mode and all the
responses are therapeutic. The Dharma is talked about as a medicine. There's some kind of
a healing that needs to happen. There's some kind of a realignment, a correction, a purification.
Right? So this is all kind of in the sutra language of like when my mind, when my mind
believes something's broken, something's wrong, something is not okay and it needs to be changed
somehow, transformed, purified, distanced, get space. That's sutra mode, which is so
important because in my mind is like that all the time. Something's wrong. What do I
do? Suffering causes suffering. The tantra mode isn't in a therapeutic modality. It says
it's all good. There's nothing wrong. There's no samsara. There's no nirvana. These are
just conceptual designations we're holding onto because we're just not seeing clearly
what actually is happening. So they don't talk about a problem and its remedy or like
kind of a challenge and our response. They talk about directly connecting to a way of
seeing and being that doesn't have this mistaken way of holding, of creating a problem that
wasn't there. It's called a tantric mode. But here, the four healing supports. Then it kind
of has both of these. In my mind, it's okay, vajrasattva, Buddha of compassion, Buddha
of purification. Because sometimes you're like, oh, I have all this bad stuff I need
to purify. You know, again, I'm so bad. I have all this bad stuff and I need to get
rid of it. So it kind of locks into that similar, I'm so bad thing. And I need to use this Buddha
to do it. But it's like more of a healing. It's like, I'm worth it. I have the value
to do this. I have this goodness there, but I need the support to help reveal this goodness.
To have the courage to recognize there's nothing wrong with me. There's nothing wrong with
the situation. If I don't have that courageous view, that's why I do vajrasattva practice.
So what are these four healing supports? One is to have remorse. And that's a very clear
discernment. To clearly see all this thing I did, the thing I said, that response I did,
the grimace I said, the kind of bad fumbling words or like kind of the emotional upheaval
I kind of like shot out there into the world. It wasn't good. It was harmful. I feel bad
about that. That discernment of recognizing a negative emotion as a negative emotion,
a destructive emotion as a destructive emotion, as something this dish, this harmonious or
like that closes us from our natural goodness. That's a lot of wisdom there to recognize
that. And we need that wisdom to be able to discern healthy habit from unhealthy habit.
So this has talked about as remorse. The first healing support is to recognize something
negative as being negative and to feel bad about it. Oh, I don't want to, this is all
this anger happening in me. All of a sudden the anger isn't me. It's something that was
happening in me or that I expressed. So there's a little distance there. And I don't want
to be, I don't want to have this anger kind of take me over all the time. That recognition
that I'm not angry, I'm not anger, something I just experienced temporarily. There's a
lot of wisdom there. And then I feel bad about this. I don't, I'm not, I'm not an angry person.
I don't want to be an angry person. I don't want to just constantly like put fires everywhere.
I'm talking about destructive anger, right? Not constructive, you know, healthy kind of
tough love. I'm talking about like kind of really harmful anger. But so this remorse
is seeing a negativity and wanting to like not keep doing it. And then we need support.
That's the second healing support. Actual have support. Well, I need help to not do
that again. So there's an external support and an internal one. In this case of Adrasapha
practice, the external support is Buddha of Adrasapha, who is like the total embodiment
of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and of your own personal teacher, is the essential
goodness, all the qualities of the awakened ones, Arhats and Bodhisattvas and Buddhas.
So this is kind of the more Vajrayana or the Buddhist support. It's the venerable sublime
noble support. But then there's also other external supports we can use like good trustworthy
friends or good professional like specialists who have a genuine ability and intention to
help us. They can help us correct like, oh, we have remorse about something we did wrong.
We can depend on their advice. We can actually go to them and confide. Oh, this wasn't, you
know, in a trustful kind of safe situation. I'm not don't feel so good about doing this
or thinking this way or doing that. And we can rely on their support. What are they helping
us point towards the inner support? The inner support is our inherent goodness, our inherent
intelligence, compassion and wisdom. They're helping us direct direct us to see that in
ourselves. They're not saying you need to rely on me forever. They're pointing us to
see ourselves more clearly to come from that place in ourselves, that Buddha nature that
has that wisdom and that compassion and that love. So in the end, that's the internal support.
That's kind of where all this is going towards all these teachings. And then the third healing
support is the antidote. One way if there's a negativity that we did, we can like have
an antidote of like doing the opposite, positive kind of it's a counteractive measure. If we
were kind of really overwhelmed by anger, then we can like try to intentionally cultivate
patience. Patience is just a willingness to be with reality as it's happening and to not
wish it changed somehow. And that's really so much easier to say than do. But we can
cultivate that. There's Paramita practices of patience. Buddha taught so many systematic
ways taking step by step on how to cultivate such a quality as patience or all the other
Paramitas as well. That's an antidote. We can also receive the blessing wisdom nectar
of Adrasattva as an antidote to instantly relieve and release all of our negativity,
all of our attachment, all of our distorted perceptions, all of the certain wrongdoings
and tendencies towards them. That's an antidote. And then fourthly, the fourth healing support
is the conviction or the commitment to really not want to repeat that mistake or that negativity,
that kind of tension or like close mindedness to not want to repeat it. So we kind of make
a firm commitment. And even though as human beings, then we think, oh, well, I might do
that again. But little by little, if we really try to have that firm resolve again and again,
it becomes stronger over time. And we actually don't want to do it anymore. And then we start
doing it less. And eventually that we actually it just becomes something we can just drop.
So it's little by little, little by little. So that's also kind of part of connecting
to this goodness and not being overwhelmed by having Dharma kind of be experiences like
a burden, another thing we have to do another kind of job, you know, little by little. This
is drop by drop. And part of that is, is like a regularity. And again, I think Pachara Pache
in this book, Awakening Dignity talks about regularity towards the very end of this book.
In 217, both training and practice require that we shift our focus from thinking about
our ordinary worries and difficulties to understanding the mind and its nature.
Doing so on a daily basis enhances our experience of dignity. The key is maintaining steady,
consistent effort without grasping at the result. The goal is to neither be dejected by poor
practice
or related by strong practice. Then we become our own master and not the victim of others opinions
or of our own fleeting emotions. At that point, the effect of our meditation will show in our
daily life. We will be more content and at ease, and our qualities of compassion and love will
shine naturally. This is the sign we're improving and that our meditation experience, behavior and
view are in harmony. So here the point I thought to highlight was this daily basis. It's like in
small
ways, short sessions many times, short moments many times, in small ways to kind of regularly
try to reconnect to our goodness. And we do that by activating our compassion for others
and by increasing our discernment, our wisdom with things like is this healthy doubt or unhealthy
doubt? Is this a negativity or positivity? Is this making me more connected towards the dharma or
less connected towards the dharma? So that becomes how we grow this wisdom. And then in the end or
towards the end, then like as our practice stabilizes, we do things little by little,
like with some regularity, little by little. So it's not just some big burden we feel bad
we couldn't get to again, but it has to be at a pace with our own life, our own mind,
where we actually can do it. Little by little, we'll connect to that dignity and have that
confidence, encourage, kind of awaken more in our experience. And then as it is always with these
sessions, like I'm a totally lost, wondering, deluded, guilt-ridden, sentient being, like,
but there are noble ones in the world. Like Hemvaseyandanya Rinpoche,
like there's so many masters, there's so many noble beings and take the time to learn from them,
to be in their presence, to sincerely, like, kind of develop a relationship that's like,
you know, where they get to know you some, and you get to know them better and cultivate that trust
.
And to actually be in the presence of some of these beings, then they'll help us have more and
more certainty, wisdom or conviction that these aren't just ideas, they're not just beliefs,
that everyone's fundamentally good. But to actually taste that in your own experience,
and little by little, we do taste that. And then those tastes, those experiences start to get
longer, and they start to permeate more of our experience, and we become more convinced
that we're fundamentally good than that we're fundamentally bad.
Our courage awakens based on our own practical lived experience. So we need to do whatever the
supportive circumstances for our mind are, with some nourishing, peaceful, encouraging love,
and also with some tough love, like if we have certain habits that we know are too overwhelming,
and they really shut us down, and they activate kind of the most destructive parts of ourselves,
we need to be more kind of courageous and strong about that. And just to like really put some kind
of strong lines around certain things we just won't do, it's too harmful, too harmful for
ourselves or others. And that's part of having good, like, renunciation. So we need to also be
really clear about that. And in the end, it all comes down to bodhicitta again and again. It really
is what this whole path comes down to, this bodhicitta. And like, I think as we, yeah,
the further we go, I think, I mean, really, it's just, it's really the answer to all of our
questions, bodhicitta, and it becomes something that we see in our own experience, and by being
around in the presence of noble ones, and in good community, the sangha, practicing kind of
little by little, the teachings of the Buddha, this bodhicitta really becomes, oh, this really
is the soul panacea. This really is both the supreme healing, as well as the completely
unfabricated natural, total pervasive naturalness of life. It can be that healing balm, and it also
can just be that relaxed, at ease, spacious naturalness. It has both sutra and tantra.
It really is kind of the, what all these practices line up with. It's the root and essence of all
these practices. So thanks so much for just kind of letting me kind of care for this topic a little
bit. Again, this is a, it's a special topic in that I know, you know, the years go by. And for
my own self and for others, this can, the heaviness of like having guilt or having things that,
that
happened to us before, or like, things that we bring from our life into the dharma, which we can't
help because we are ourselves, and we engage the dharma according to who we are, our humanness.
Like, it's a real tenderness I have that as much, as much as we can to like, really, how can we
skillfully engage the dharma according to our own minds and our own hearts? And I really have a
tenderness around that. Because, you know, it's hard, it's hard to see myself fumbling with the
same kind of same challenge and the years go by, and they just stack up, you know? It's like, oh,
what can I do to like, just be more skillful about this? And if you're kind of experiencing a
similar
thing, and really genuinely like to have consider, like love for yourself, like, what can I do to
not
have this be the same problem 10 years from now? Like to love yourself that much. They say that,
if you look at yourself in the future, like with some, as if like, kind of give yourself a lot of
reasons about why you want to care for that future you. Oh, why are you going to save money for the
future you? So you can, because you're worth it, you're valuable, you're going to have the, like,
you want this Buddha nature to come out more, you want the supportive conditions for you in the
future to flourish, to connect more, to have more time for dharma, more time to serve in the
teachings.
Like, if you see this future you in a more kind of rosy light, more connecting to its goodness,
actually, it'll help you activate the steps that kind of lead towards that. Instead of just,
oh, it's me now, and I'm going to put what has happening today always in the front.
And then just think what it would be like if we thought of everyone like that.
Buddha is, Buddha's teaching is so profound. It's trying to orient towards the future.
Use now to make the future better for all beings. And then it gives this long list of reasons why
all beings are so valuable and why oneself is so valuable. This is, like, such a profound set of
psycho technologies that we can taste in simple ways right now in our experience. So really use
whatever lines up with your own mind, your own heart to do that. And step by step we're in this
together. There's no way out. So let's, like, make it really nice for each other. Okay? It's all,
it's
really all good. I'm really glad we get to be in this together forever because we're all really
good. So yeah, thank you. Sending love. Then we'll do this practice together. This is Dhujintar
Sanandar practice. We'll do just a silent sit here quietly, and then we'll begin with this prayer
calling the Lama from afar. Bye. Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thanks so much.
Thank you. I thought I just really quick few little kind of closing things. One, in terms of
kind of lightening up one's practice, I think a good support I found is if there's certain
prayers that otherwise might be kind of intimidating, like they're so glorious and
resplendent and at ease and just somewhat over like otherworldly or so beyond to like just pick one
and read it really slowly and just let yourself be with it kind of like read a line and just kind
of pause then read a line pause and kind of let your mind kind of the space of your attention
of your awareness just kind of be with it as you read it instead of just kind of trying to charge
through it but just really take your time and just kind of give yourself the space to kind of like
resonate with the prayer the meaning and then secondly in Vajrayana practice one point that
I found really helpful is that so much of the like a mantra recitation for example is said to be
self reciting so it's almost like instead of it's instead of like because we're practicing and
meditating it produces the result of this mantra happening instead of that it's actually like we
like turn the corner of a room and you like look in some other thing happening and like the party's
already going and we just didn't see it before or it's like a the channel of the tv is already
kind of streaming along in the in the air and we just tune into it being there so it takes off the
sense of their beings like I have to do all this work to produce this amazing thing like a mantra
or a visualization and instead it's just it's like the self-resounding sound of the nature of the
self-resounding expression or form of the nature of one's goodness it's almost just like you show
up and kind of can't believe it like this sense of awe of like wow this is happening how wonderful
and to kind of like hold the practice a little more in that kind of a space that's
really technically how they say like the specific instructions around that with Vajrayana and third
ly
if there's something that kind of it's a habitual hang-up that your mind keeps looping back into
kind of a negative story or some kind of a something that like really keeps kind of like
closing you up and shutting you down so i'd say part of like one thing i found helpful is
would we do a practice session however long it is that when we get to the dedication of the merit
that we really think of that specific kind of imbalance or that mistake we made and we
specifically also dedicate that positive virtue to bring resolution to that specific imbalance
to if we harm someone for example in the past to really dedicate specifically intentionally
think of like sending the virtue of the practice you just did to heal that to help that person to
resolve that conflict and so like we can do that from a distance and quietly we don't have to say
anything about it to anyone else so we don't have to we can prevent any other conflict or something
from arising but really like as an offering like as a way of kind of kind of forgiving the
situation
forgiving oneself for forgiving kind of making amends and like so we can move on in our practice
but do it with a sense of kindness and like love and care for that being too or that situation to
like kind of to care for ourselves enough to try to resolve that so we can kind of let our
compassion and wisdom and love kind of shine out more brightly so there are a few little thoughts
thank you friends so much thank you very much
[BLANK_AUDIO]